I'm sure you've been asked before, and I probably know the answers to them
myself, but maybe a lot of the listeners in the radio show won't. So, you know,
just put up with that, I guess. Oh, sure, yeah. I'm well used to that. Yeah, I'm
sure. Tell me your front name again. Daryl. Daryl. Yeah, Daryl. Okay. I'm an
English teacher here at Odessa College. Right. Okay, listen, you obviously had
an extremely varied background, and I wondered if you could just say a few words
about how you began as a writer. Okay. I began to write when I was an able
seaman in the Merchant Marine, and how that came about was that I left home
before I graduated from high school. It's a fascinating thing. I lecture at
colleges and universities all over the United States and in England and in
France, And I have yet to get my high school diploma. Someday somebody will
grant me an honorary high school diploma. But anyway, I was on the ship. And you
had a lot of time to read. And I conceived the idea of an absolutely foolproof
crime that would net me thousands and thousands of dollars. And I even did
research on it. I was on a coastwise tanker. And as I was going up and down the
coast, when we stopped at a port, I would send off a letter to the railroad, so
it was one of the things that was involved, and the insurance companies, that
was another, and the post office, that was still another. I got all my research
done as to how to commit this particular kind of robbery, and they had letters
carefully written so that nobody would know what I was up to. And when I had all
my material, I found that I did not have the immoral courage to commit the
crime, so I wrote it as a story. this was way back in the late 30s and i sent my
story off to a newspaper syndicate i didn't know anything about writing
particularly and there was they were buying a 1500 word short short stories that
they published every day in the in the syndicate and uh when i got up to new
york in the ship to my amazement i got a letter of acceptance and uh so i quit
the sea and and came ashore to be a writer. And I got my money, not on
acceptance, but on publication. And it was five whole dollars. And they would
buy one and sometimes two stories a week, but no more. And so four and a half
months or so, I lived on five and sometimes ten dollars a week. My room cost me
seven. And whatever I saved, I could eat. And I learned a lot about being
hungry. Did you ever notice that pound cake has no crust on the ends? What they
do is chop them off and they sell them in their day-old store. And at that time,
you could get a whole shopping bag full of cake ends for a nickel. And so I used
to live on that. One time, I got a whole shopping bag full and it was moldy, but
I ate it anyhow. And I was so sick, I didn't eat for three days, and so I saved
myself some money. You know, like that. It was a hard school. it really was but
then I finally after some months of that and I think I went back to C for a
short while I finally met John Campbell in 1939 early 1939 he was the editor of
Astounding Science Fiction and a wonderful fantasy magazine called Unknown and
so I started writing for him and then after that it just exploded One time I had
four stories on the stands at the same time, and those two magazines I had to
get two new names.
So it was an interesting beginning.
Okay, excellent. Now you've done a lot of writing for the pulps, but I don't
think anybody would categorize you as a pulp writer. Well, you know, this is
difficult with the whole matter of categorization anyway. We're in the grip of
the taxonomist and people who put labels on things and stick them into cubby
holes. Taxonomy has its uses, there's no question about that. You have to be
able to find and retrieve information and that's what taxonomy is all about. But
more and more, there seems to come over our whole culture the idea that if you
can put a label on it, you understand it. And that is not what taxonomy is for.
Taxonomy is handles by which you can pick something up and look at it, but for
so many people in so many ways, the label is sufficient. You know, he's a
Republican, or his mother was a Jew,
you know, he's a poet, he's in ESPIT, or whatever. They're all labels, and just
so little effort made to understand what's under these labels. Pulp fiction has
suffered from the same thing. Pulp actually referred to the kind of paper it was
printed on, not to its quality. There was the pulps, and there were the slicks.
The slicks were magazines like the Sidered Evening Post and Collier's. And
Ladies' Home Journal. And pulps were things like Black Mask and Air War Stories
and science fiction and fantasy and the like. But it's so easy for the
taxonomists and for people who don't pay proper attention to what was going on
to feel that pulp was a qualitative comment and slick was also qualitative.
Slick paper was better literature than pulp paper. Some of the finest writing
around and some of the best pulp writers as such. I mean, the best writers of
the time began in pulp and they only gravitated to the slicks not because they
got better, but because they got paid more. Ray Bradbury is a perfect example of
that. so is Dasha Lennon and the like
why do you think that you never became more, I know you've written mainstream
fiction, I know you don't like categories either but I wonder why you're mainly
noted a lot of your writing is science fiction fantasy rather than mainstream
well first of all because I love the field because it's the only genre which has
no limitations whatsoever, a lot of people there are the taxonomists who are
into it again. They feel that science fiction is the literature of the future
and of space. Which is nonsense. It's true that a lot of it is, but you can
write science fiction about the past. You can write science fiction about that
marvelous place called Other. Just some Other place that doesn't have any
reference to where we go in the future. That's the best kind. That's the kind
that I think one of the things that science fiction is for. If you don't like
the government, go ahead and create a new kind of government give it a push and
see how it works uh you can study whole cultures and religions and also some
literature and art i've gone into that in some of my stories which are
essentially in places that occur just other not in the future or in the past
necessarily one of the very finest science fiction books around uh is by
somebody i'm very proud to call one of my ex-students. It's called Wild Seed and
it's by Octavia Butler. And it begins somewhere around the 17th century and goes
up to about 1910, which is hardly future fiction. It's a totally original
structure, original idea, and beautifully, beautifully written. That lady is
tremendous. She really is one of the big ones. Yeah, I know that book. She is
very good. Yeah. Listen, in the late 30s and through the 40s, did you have any
contact with those science fiction writers? Was there any sense of community or
groupings or anything like that? Oh, sure. I am characteristically not a joiner
as such. There was a group called the Hydro Club, which was completely informal.
And the rule one was that there are no rules for this organization. And an awful
lot of people belong to the Hydro Club. And through that, in the early years, I
got to know all sorts of people like Harvigold and Fred Pohl and Henry Kuttner
and so on. Well, the whole raft of those early writers, I think I knew them all.
And there was a group there, Fred Pohl has written about them called the
Futurians. I was never involved in that particularly. early. I attended the very
first Milford Science Fiction Writers Conference in Milford, New Jersey. I guess
that was in 1951.
Judith Merrill I was very close to. I knew virtually everybody in the field at
that time, except one or two of the West Coast people.
Okay, one sort of general question on your style.
Many of your stories have different kinds of style, and I wonder if you
experiment deliberately or is it something that comes naturally to you? It's
absolutely deliberate. The creation of a style, you can go a long way in the
literary business. Steinbeck did it, Aldous Huxley did it. One of the stunning
examples is Ray Bradbury. but you develop a style and then you stick to it,
pretty soon you become imitable. That is to say anybody with any real facility
with words can sit down and write a pure paragraph of Steinbeck or for that
matter Hemingway. To imitate Hemingway and Steinbeck is very, very easy and
Bradbury particularly is extremely easy to imitate. But you don't imitate Samuel
Delaney. for example. You don't imitate, I mean, not by the paragraph. I'm not
saying that you can sit down and write a Bradbury story or a Hemingway story.
That's a different matter. But we're talking just about the matter of style. And
yes, it's a very conscious effort on my part to be able to write with facility
in any of a number of styles. And sometimes they're first-person stories. And I
write out of the mouth of the person who's talking. And not everybody talks You
know, in a high literary style That's what I thought Aldous Huxley For mostly
You read an Aldous Huxley novel And Aldous Huxley talks like Aldous Huxley And
old men talk like Aldous Huxley And little girls talk like Aldous Huxley It's a
Monotone All the words come out of all the mouths With the same kind of cadence
And I don't consider This really top writing Why I admire Delany so much Is
that when he talks Ghetto Black, it is for real. But if he has two characters
discussing modern American poetry, they talk in terms of William Carlos Williams
or T.S. Eliot. And he knows, he's got a good ear, he knows the cadence of this
kind of writing. And I admire that so very much. That you can't imitate. And so
I consciously do that. Okay, James Gunn has written that because of Sturgeon,
other writers have been freer to write what they wish to write and able to find
a market for it. I wondered if you were conscious of yourself as having that
kind of a role. Not at all. Not at all. I tell you, the last few years have been
real revelations to me. For one thing, I didn't realize that I'd had so much
personal impact on people until, what was it, six years or so now, Now, I went
to Italy, and a woman came up to me dragging an interpreter, and the interpreter
said she doesn't speak any English, but there are two things that she wants to
tell you. One of them is that you write women better than any writer she knows.
And the other thing is that because of something that you wrote, she did not
kill herself one night. And the woman began to cry, and the interpreter began to
cry, and I began to cry. And it was quite an experience. I suddenly realized
that what I have done, apparently, I've been able to reach a great many people
far deeper than I had any idea that I was doing. When I look back over the mail
that I've gotten over the years, I realize how many people in how many different
ways have told me that same kind of thing. It's extremely gratifying. It's also
a little frightening. I mean, it's frightening enough to make you terrified of
touching your typewriter.
what's his name
not Lafferty I'm sorry I have to stop a minute and think of it Barry Malzberg
wrote a fascinating book called Engines of the Night and I have a quote from it
here that somebody's earrocks for me and sent to me and he said the most
important science fiction writer of the 40s was probably Theodore Sturgeon He
said he was not the best or the most significant, nor did he make the most
fundamental impression, even as a stylist, the basis of his reputation. He might
have fallen behind a cutness in top form, but what Sturgeon did was to keep open
the possibility for a kind of science fiction that eventually many others came
to do, which in itself is very gratifying. He says Sturgeon's contribution was
unique in his use of style, internalization, and quirky characterization. He was
keeping the door open for everything that happened after 1950, when the gold
voucher and the 50s perspective became the alternative that dominated the field.
If he had not been around through this decade to hold the flag for this kind of
science fiction, had not established that the literature could be style
-oriented, it is possible that the 50s perspective would not have developed. The
editors and potential audience might have been there, but no basis would have
been existed upon which writers within the field could build. It's so gratifying
to read a thing like that, you know. Years after the fact, Halsburg never told
me, I think he was writing that in an essay. And I came on it quite by accident.
But apparently that was the case. And I'll tell you quickly a story. A few years
ago, there was a little boy who went to see his buddy. He was six or seven years
old. His mother told him to be back before dark. And he was so busy playing with
his friend that he looked out the window and saw it was dark and he went rushing
home and like little kids will he dragged a stick along a picket fence and when
he got to the corner he whanged it against the lamppost and immediately all the
lights in the northeastern United States went out. Remember that one? That big
blackout? He went rushing home to his mother weeping and threw himself into her
arms and said, God mommy I didn't mean it. I didn't mean it. Well this is the
way I felt when I first read things like this. very gratifying and very
surprising to me no, I did not do that on purpose honest to God, mom, I didn't
mean it yeah, a lot of critics that I've read feel that same way that's a pretty
universal opinion in relation to that a number of critics and authors also
identify you as sort of a shatterer of taboos some of the themes that you wrote
about just hadn't been handled in science fiction before yeah, that's right,
that I've done on purpose Stand by for a coffee.
Coughing over. Yes, I have purposely broken taboos. And, you know, I wrote the
first stories in science fiction about homosexuality, for example, which dealt
with homosexuality and with incest. And I had a three-parter in Omni last year
which dealt with cannibalism. But these stories were not about homosexuality.
and about incest and about cannibalism. Essentially, they were about
confrontation. All my life, I've been infuriated by people who shuck away from
an idea. I don't want to hear about that. Oh, don't tell me that. I don't want
to hear it. You know, that always angers me. Because only by confrontation can
we really learn anything. The whole history of, well, a subject like
masturbation, for example, which absolutely terrified the three or four
generations before mine, and preoccupied them too. The inventor of one of our
more famous breakfast foods, he was a nutritional doctor, and he used to write
dietary and medical advice books for the home. And about 75% of them has to do
with masturbation and how it will make your hair fall out and give you a
softening of the brain and tuberculosis and cancer and all kinds of things.
nowadays with a little confrontation and a little research and study, you can
read in the highest level of women's magazines not only how to do it but how to
do it well and it's become a totally accepted practice but the horror that went
on because people would not confront it or would not find out what the truth was
caused so much frightful damage I mean, people committed suicide over that. I
had a relative whose whole life was absolutely made hell by his preoccupation
with that. To be tempted and finally to yield and then feel guilty and feel
guilty and so guilty that he would never tell anybody about it. It wrecked his
whole life. That was a lot of years ago. I mean, it was in the past generation.
but it's an example of what I mean now people have got to confront if we meet
you'll probably see me wearing a little silver medallion it's a letter cute with
an arrow to it it's my trademark and what it means is ask the next question to
me it's the symbol of everything that humanity has ever created and it's the
only way it has been created by people asking the next question the one that
follows and so often people ask the next question and the one that follows and
the one that follows until they suddenly come to a question they don't want to
ask because they're afraid they might get the answer and there they stop and
when you stop asking the next question you die, you become a zombie and join the
ranks of the zombies you see marching around you who have stopped asking the
next question it's a very symbol of life and of progress and of science and
everything toward basic truth when you ever reach basic truth you'll find not a
thing or a precept, but you'll find a process. You'll find something going on.
And this is the way I've been thinking apparently all my life. I get very, very
irritated when I find that people refuse to think beyond a certain point.
There's a bumper sticker that goes around in the Bible Belt. God said it. I
believe it. That settled it. When you see a bumper sticker like that, you've
just heard the crash of a closing mind. there's plenty of room out there to
confront the whole idea of God and to go on with it and ask the next question
and the question that follows without committing any particular kind of sin
excellent, that's very good I'm in the middle of the Bible Belt out here in
Odessa I know exactly what you mean, those kind of people isn't that a great
bumper sticker? yeah God said it, I believe it, that settles it yeah, okay
listen, let me ask a couple questions about some of your particular works. The
book Venus Plus X, which I guess was published in 1960, I suppose the impetus
behind that was the sexual stereotyping in our society. Yeah, that's right. That
came about when I was leaping through a magazine, and I saw an ad for, of all
things, tire chains. Weed tire chains. And there was a photograph of a girl in
her underwear holding out a tire chain. And it struck me cold. I said, what? on
Earth got to do with a tire chain? Clearly, you know, it was a grabber by the
advertising business. Maybe stop and look at the ads. but what has a girl with a
clothes dog got to do with a tire chain? And I began to think what kind of a
civilization, what would it be like to live in a culture where there was no
particular sexual bias at all? And so I started, first of all, creating a
society in which there was no sexual at all. That people were regenerated like
oysters, which can be both either male or female. But at the beginning there
neither. and I couldn't make that work. So I went in another direction and
created a race of people and each individual was both sexes.
And therefore there was no sexual differentiation. They were just people. And it
got into their love, marriage, their sexuality, also into their art, their
literature, their architecture. And so I had a ball with that. Venus Plus X is
not, you know, really a novel at all. It's a tract. It's an exposition of the
ideas that I was getting at the time. Yeah, you wouldn't necessarily advocate
the kind of surgical alteration in that book. No, by no means. You have to be
careful of that one. An author comes out with a rather radical notion. It's very
easy to assume that he's promoting that. Heinlein for example got a lot of rocks
thrown at him for a starship trooper because they felt that that was
particularly the kind of military he advocates, it's not not really, he has a
military background, it's perfectly true which made his description of the
starship trooper seem very real and that he was promoting it he also has a
reputation for being a male chauvinist pig however I know the man extremely me
well and I know that that could be the least of cases. He's the only married man
I've ever seen who always rises to his feet when his wife comes into the room In
the Notebooks of Lazarus Long there are several items somewhere a page long and
some are only a paragraph or a sentence but the very shortest one in the
Notebooks of Lazarus Long could not possibly have been written by a male
chauvinist pig You know what it is? rub her feet Thank you.
Okay.
Would you say that More Than Human is probably your best known work? Is that the
one you get most responsive? I would say so. And when I sold Finnish and Israeli
rights two years ago, it got into its 15th and 16th languages. And just how many
editions, I have no idea. Genuinely, I know there were five or six English
editions and several Spanish and a number of French and four Japanese editions.
And I think I'm proudest of all of that. If a novel can pass the language
barrier and the cultural barrier and go into more editions then I think that's a
real achievement. The French now have film rights and it's in the works now to
be a film finally after all these years. we had a really superb director but
through various machinations he has dropped out so I don't know exactly who is
going to direct it at this point the script is written by me and by Jane
Tannehill my lady Jane my wife who's a superb script writer well she's a very
loaded lady she really is tremendous person she is at the moment down at the
metaphysical center where She will be
ordained a minister in the American Holistic Church next July. She completed all
last season with the San Diego Symphony Orchestra and the Master Chorale. She's
a chorale singer and a composer and a musician and a born teacher. She's also an
established science fiction writer. she's sold analog and amazing and chrysalis
and as I say a very very accomplished person and as a script writer she's really
splendid it was a joy to work with her and I don't work easily with other people
but we wrote a a very fine script for more than human and I suspect there'll be
more coming up of that of our collaborating on screenplay that's good that's
good I'm happy to hear that about the movie of course I guess that was The
original story there was in Baby Makes Three. I wonder why it made you... Baby
Makes Three. Yeah. Yeah. What made you add the other two to that? The
springboard for that was in a book by Pearl Buck, which was called Pavilion of
Women. I read it so many years ago that I hardly remember the book at all. But
there was one passage in there which described a monk who took care of some
children in a cave in the woods, and they were uneducated and wild children.
They'd have died without him. And he was just an impoverished monk himself, and
he took care of these raggedy little children. And that image always stayed with
me. And somehow that and the whole idea of what would happen if each of these
children, coming from various places and being various kinds of children, had
very special ESP talents. and again it was a question of investigating what the
impact would be on the world as a whole as some of the newly recognized
proclivities of the human mind came up and this of course there are literally
thousands of books that have been written on that theme since then of course the
people in that book as in so many of your other stories and novels I think
they're sort of misfits and I wondered why you pick that kind of character so
often. Well, I think a misfit has a chance to be objective. And for one thing,
he sees society as a whole from its underbelly or from way off at one side.
Essentially, it's not so much misfits. The key to what I write, I think, is
loneliness. I learned earlier that you can write about excitement, you can write
about adventure, you can write love and sex. so on. And basically, in each case,
you don't hit too many people. But if you write about loneliness, everybody's an
expert. I'm fond of saying that if you know some guy who collects pheasant
feathers, and that's his whole preoccupation, and you write a story that
involves pheasant feathers, and you know what you're talking about, he's going
to love it. But the incidence of people in the general population who collect
pheasant feathers is very small. but the point is that because you wrote to an
expert of an expertise you see you grab him now what are people as a whole
mostly expert at loneliness the world is full of experts on loneliness it's
something that everybody recognizes when he sees it so it's not so much that
these people are misfits it's that they're lonely and I think that that's the
hook that I can throw into people the hardest but then on the other hand a
number of your stories too give the solution to that is some sort of love that's
right I would have said that love is probably the principal theme I find through
all your work that's right and isn't it the antithesis of loneliness I mean it's
the yin and the yang it's the balancing principle to loneliness and the cure for
loneliness is love individual to individual or individual in his relationship to
the entire world. Yeah, I would have said love in all its meanings, not
necessarily individuals, but in all of its... That's right. Okay. One more brief
question on that More Than Human book. Do you think that we do have latent ESP
or psi powers? There's no question about it. I've always felt so. And
particularly so in the seven years I've been married to Jane because Jane is a
psychic and she's now involved in the metaphysical center here in San Diego and
she's learning and teaching both these whole courses on all sorts of
metaphysical subjects further than that I recently attended a fascinating
seminar at the Esplan Institute up on the coast there oh lord what a beautiful
place that is the seminar was run by Dr. Lilly, John Lilly. You've heard of him
in connection with dolphins and the like. And Amit Goswami, who's a theoretical
physicist from the University of Oregon. And Arthur Young, he's the man who
invented the helicopter and so on. And the general thrust of the thing was
quantum mechanics. And when quantum mechanics gets up into its higher levels, it
approaches philosophy, metaphysics, and religion. there's no question about it
but it also deals with the potentialities of the human mind and is ESP and so on
and we ran some experiments during that seminar on precognition and telepathy
and so on with rather breathtaking results you'll find quantum mechanics people
generally if you go into the book section which has to do with philosophy and
quantum mechanics, you'll find this melding coming along between these higher
levels of science and philosophy. And it always includes something about the
untapped possibilities of the human mind. This ceases to be totally fantastic
anymore. The psychic possibilities, so-called supernatural, is one of the better
documented things. There are documents going back 2,000 years which deal with
it. And we've all experienced it. Sometimes we don't notice our own experiences,
but we do. And investigations of such things as past lives and so on, it's just
fascinating to get into. You don't have to believe everything about it. You can
take a perfectly scientific attitude and simply sit around gathering data. The
thing is, you could gather the data you don't like as well as the data that you
do like. There's a paradigm there with flying saucers, excuse me, where people
ask questions of me at conventions. Do you believe in flying saucers? Well, do I
believe in unidentified flying objects? Yeah. And anybody with any observation
has seen flying objects which we couldn't identify. do I believe they come from
a certain planet or that they have people in there who've come to Earth to
straighten us out for our old problems because we can't sell them ourselves and
so on? No, I don't believe that. I would sit and gather data until I got
hardware and bodies until I can really know precisamente and exactly what these
things are. So I make no assumptions. I just gather data. But if something comes
along which I prefer not to believe, if it's hard data, I'll believe it. I won't
believe it until it is hard data, however. But you've got to keep your mind open
for any facts that come in or listen to anything that anybody says and just hold
it in abeyance until it's either proved or disproved. There's no sense in
screaming about chariots from heaven and then screaming just as hard is that
there are no chariots from heaven. Just gather data quietly until... If you
gather enough data about anything, you'll find out what the truth is. The only
great crime in that area is to get data and then not tell anybody that you have
it and the military is extremely guilty of that. Right, okay. I guess I would
probably characterize you this is sort of another way of saying what we were
just talking about as a romantic and I would point to say a story like Thunder
and Roses as an example of that. Yeah, that's a very interesting story. That was
written, you know, when the dust was still settling over Hiroshima. It's
probably the first atomic doom story that was written after the bomb was
dropped. It was written in late 1945.
And I wrote that with considerable passion. There wasn't anybody in the world
who understood what had happened, except the people in the science fiction
fraternity, and maybe one or two rather forward-thinking scientists at Oak Ridge
and in the state of Washington. and for the rest of the world thought it was
just another Big Bang. But in science fiction there, John Campbell had been
publishing Atomic Power and Atomic War stories for 15 years before that. And we
all understood what had happened. Every single person who had been writing or
reading science fiction understood precisely what had happened and what it meant
to the world. Now, of course, it's become very much in the forefront, but we all
saw it coming. Very bad. An ugly situation. Yeah, that was a powerful story. I
guess you get a lot of response about that one, don't you? Oh, yes, I do. And
it's been reprinted a good many times. As a matter of fact, Ben Bova was just
about to publish it in Omni as a classic when he left. And I don't know what the
situation is with the story again, but chances are it will show up there. Yeah,
and in relation to that, too, you've written about a number of discoveries or
events before they ever came about. Has that ever been pointed out to you? Time
and again. Last year, a long section from one of my stories was the heading of
an article in the Institute for Electronic and Electrical Engineers in their
journal, and it had to do with the creation of a duplicated random. That is,
that you have a random sequence, and you duplicate that random elsewhere, which
is a direct conquits direction in terms. But this happens to be just the core of
a new development in satellite communications, particularly military satellite
communications, which can't be tapped. You can't tap a random communication
unless, of course, you can know what that randomness is in which case it's not
random anymore. But it's a duplicated random, and essentially that's what's been
developed. that was, oh, 20 years before it had been accomplished. I had been
accused of inventing Velcro, which is in one of my stories about 15 years before
it appeared on the market. The illuminated wristwatch with a readout was in one
of my stories. The most amazing thing of all, though, was before Watson then
quickly discovered the DNA, the structure of the DNA molecule, I had a story
about some people who were marooned on a planet and when they came out of their,
they had all been frozen when they came out of their little frozen cocoons they
found that they were on a planet that was not on any of their star charts and
standing in the cabin with them was a religious symbol of a double spiral and
the whole story had to do with evolution First recidivism, each generation of
these maroon people was slightly more primitive than the one before. It got
right down to the cell. And then that cell began to revolve again into something
else. And the whole figure, the whole symbolism there was of a double spiral, a
double helix. And, you know, something that goes down to a base and continues to
spiral back up again into something else. And lo and behold, years later, And
Rick and Watson discovered the structure of the DNA molecule which contains all
this information. Now, where that kind of thing comes from, I just can't begin
to tell you. But it has happened to me time and time and time again. That story
you're referring to was the golden helix, wasn't it? Yeah. Yeah, I was thinking
also about, I guess it was one of your very first science fiction stories, the
ether breather in 1939, where you get a picture of the importance, the public
importance, the impact of television. I didn't even know there was television
then. Yeah, it became widely public around 1948, and I had already been writing
for 10 years, and I started writing as a very, very much of a youngster. Do you
recall how you assumed television was going to be so important or how that story
came out? Well, I was living in New York at that time, along around Rockefeller
Center, and there was a whole lot in the radio and in the newspapers about
television the first television uh broadcast was done in 1925 by some scientists
at cbs and they used the scanning disc with a bunch of little holes on a
spinning disc and the light scanned up and down the holes were drilled in a very
close spiral and the light scanned back and forth as it spun put little spots of
light on the screen and there was quite a battle between that system and the
cathode ray tube. And this cathode ray tube finally won out. You'd have to have
a spinning disc in your set, too, in the home and they'd have to be synchronized
with what was being broadcast, which was the chief difficulty with it. But
there's an interesting thing that in that story, I learned a great deal of
everything I could possibly find out about television at the time. And I
realized the enormous difficulties. Black and white television was one thing,
but color television was something else again. was such a hard nut to crack and
so complex a technological achievement that I put it 200 years ahead in the
future. And it turned out the first colored sets came out about three years
later. So often a science fiction writer is way ahead of science but there are
times when science jumps way ahead of the science fiction writer. The
microprocessor, for example, was hardly mentioned in any story ever until it
suddenly appeared on people's wrists. I mean, that's one time when technology
really got the jump on us. I could kick myself for that, too, because way back
in the early 40s, I met a guy who told me about a German patent which had run
out and was now a public domain of a liquid crystal in which, if you pass the
vultures through it, the transparent drift crystal became opaque. He told me
about that as a kind of laboratory phenomenon. I could have taken that and run
with it, but I didn't. And that's the secret of your liquid crystal watch. Okay,
one of my favorite stories that you've written. I don't think it's one of your
more characteristic ones, but it's one of your better knowns. It's the
microcosmic God. Yeah, I'm not too fond of that story. Not because the idea
isn't unique. It is. It was a brand new kind of an idea. But because it was so
badly written. It was the first science fiction story I wrote. And there was so
much that I did not know about writing. And one of the most important things
about people as a whole, and if you're going to write people well, is that
nobody's all bad. Nobody's all good either. But the heavy in there was the bank
president, that he's cut out of 100% pure cardboard. He is so poorly written.
And that angers me every time I think of it. If I were to write it today, he
would be very dimensional, and there would be some good things about him too.
And then you could believe him. the idea itself the little people under the dome
was so overwhelming that nobody else but me apparently noticed how badly that
story is read well the idea carries it so well that you know the
characterization just isn't noticed I don't think that's right it's called the
dazzle principle you can write with something really bright enough people don't
notice the flaws but I do okay listen what about your horror fiction do you like
to write horror stories Sometimes, yes. It's nice to give a, that they have an
amazing impact on people sometimes. Although nowadays I think they're being
vastly overdone. And why people are flocking to see all these imitations of
the exorcist and so on. I don't know. It's depressing. It really is. And each
one you see, of course, has less impact than the one before. And it's got to be
more bloody and more gory and more horrible and more flesh brains and buckets of
gore and so on. So it loses its impact. You've got overdoses of that stuff. But
there's a certain something in the titillation of horror. I wrote one story. It
was called Professor Teddy Bear. Years later, I went to a convention and a lady
came up to me and she was all claws. She was only caught my eyes out. She was so
furious for having written that story. It seemed that when she read it, Didn't
get any sleep for two weeks. And in some peculiar way, she blamed me for it,
that is, as if I had personally written it personally to upset her. However,
that kind of reaction is very rare. Mostly people kind of enjoy it because
basically they know they're safe in spite of the fact that you have been living
in terror for a little while. Yeah, that was, I remember that story, but the one
that impressed me the most is a very understated horror story, and that would be
Bianca's hands. Oh yeah. Now that has really struck down deep to some people,
and I couldn't find out why. I think it's the understatement of it. It's so
subtly done, and when you think about it, it just becomes more horrible all the
time. Well, for one thing, it's a love story. It's very profoundly a love story.
and people don't like to associate love with the things that happen in that
story and yet there's what they call the lebestote, the love death and
essentially this kind of consummation I think is something that on a very deep
level that people do recognize that death and love have a great deal in common.
The image of Kali, you know, the goddess, the Hindu goddess with all the arms,
Kali is the goddess of death but she's also the source they're one and the same
thing and the idea of the Leasteau the love death being worked by all kinds of
people from Richard Wagner right on through that love and death are the same
thing that the ending is also the beginning and people gravitate to that but
it's down so deep that when they really begin to get a glimpse of it. They're
terrified. One lady read the story once and horrified her just terribly. She
happened to be a rabid sturgeon fan and I met her at a convention and I recorded
that story for Cadman Records and it was for alternate world records which is
now in the possession of Cadman and she definitely wanted to buy the record and
get my autograph on it but on the other hand she couldn't bear the story. And
for once I had somebody who'd been that profoundly affected. And I had a chance
to kind of pin her wings to the wall and find out why. And she said, well, you
know why. I said, no, I don't, really I don't. Tell me why it upset you. And she
said, all those disembodied hands crawling all around over the house.